# General Instructions 

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Time: 3 hours 
> Maximum Marks: 70 

1. The question paper has five sections and 33 questions. All questions are compulsory. 
2. Section-A has 16 questions of 1 mark each; Section-B has 5 questions of 2 marks each; Section-C has 7 questions of 3 marks each; Section-D has 2 case-based questions of 4 marks each and Section-E has 3 questions of 5 marks each. 
3. There is no overall choice. However, internal choices have been provided in some questions. A student has to attempt only one of the alternatives in such questions. 
4. Wherever necessary, neat and properly labeled diagrams should be drawn. 

# Section-AA cell has 32 chromosomes, if it undergoes mitotic cell division twice then what will the chromosome numbers in the daughter cells be? 
    1. 16 
    2. 64
    3. 32
    4. 48 
2. At which stage dissolution of the synaptonemal complex take place?
    1. Diakinesis 
    2. Lepotene 
    3. Zygotene
    4. DIplotene 
3. Where do the electrons move from the primary acceptors of PS-1 in the Z scheme?
    1. To NADP 
    2. To $NADPH_2$
    3. To FAD
    4. None of these 
4. $C_4$ pathway occurs in -- 
    1. Maize 
    2. Pea 
    3. Bryophyllum 
    4. Mango 
5. What is the net gain of ATP molecules formed directly from glycolysis?
    1. 4
    2. 6
    3. 8
    4. None of these
6. Which of the following is the final electron acceptor in respiration?
    1. $H_2O$
    2. $NADH_2$
    3. $O_2$
    4. $CO_2$
7. Name the biocatalyst that catalyzes the phosphorylation of glucose 
    1. Isomerase 
    2. Carbonic anhydrase 
    3. Hexokinase 
    4. PEP carboxylase 
8. Which of the following is a weedicide?
    1. $GA_3$
    2. IAA 
    3. 2,4-D  
    4. ABA 
9. Which PGR promotes the senescence of leaves? 
    1. NAA 
    2. $GA_3$
    3. IAA 
    4. Ethylene 
10. What is the duration of a cardiac cycle?
    1.  1.8 s 
    2.  0.8 s
    3.  0.5 s
    4.  1.5 s  
11. Which of the following cells secret serotonin? 
    1.  Eosinophil
    2.  Neutrophil
    3.  Monocyte 
    4.  Basoplil 
12. The epithelial cells of Bowman's capsule are called 
    1.  Columns of Bertini 
    2.  Podocyte 
    3.  Renal Pelvis 
    4.  Calyx 
13. Which hormone is released by JG cells 
    1.  Renin 
    2.  Rennin 
    3.  ADH 
    4.  ANF 
14. The myelinated nerve fibers are enveloped with 
    1.  Nissil's Granules 
    2.  Nodes or Ranvier 
    3.  Schwann cells 
    4.  Dura matter 
15. Which cells release glucagon? 
    1.  $\alpha$-cells 
    2.  $\beta$-cells 
    3.  Leydig cells 
    4.  None of these 
16. Which hormone regulates the 24-hour rhythm of the body? 
    1.  $T_4$
    2.  ACTH 
    3.  Melatonin 
    4.  Thymosins

# Section-B 
17. What happens at $G_0$ and the S-Phase of interphase?
18. Why is ABA considered a stress hormone?
19. State the importance of SA and AV nodes.
20. What is oxidative phosphorylation? Name any two respirator substrates. ***OR*** Write the difference between autumn wood and spring wood. 
21. What are bipolar and unipolar neurons?

# Section-C  
22. Explain the Renin-Angiotensin mechanism. ***OR*** Explain counter current mechanism. 
23. What is RQ? Why is respiration considered an amphibolic pathway? ***OR*** Explain the different types of vascular systems with diagrams. 
24. Why are IAA and GAs considered growth hormones? 
25. Describe the structure of the nucleus with a labeled diagram. 
26. Draw a standard ECG and explain the different segments of it. 
27. What is photorespiration? Why is it a wasteful process? ***OR*** Explain different types of aestivation.
28. Mention the names of different classes of enzymes. 

# Section-D  
29. Nucleotides are the building blocks of nucleic acids. A nucleotide has three chemically distinct compounds. One is a heterocyclic compound, the second is a monosaccharide and the third is a phosphoric acid or phosphate. Now answer the following questions- 
    1.  The heterocyclic compounds in nucleic acids are nitrogenous bases. Mention the name of nitrogenous bases present in RNA. 
    2.  Name the monosaccharide found in DNA. 
    3.  What are nucleotides? 
30. Joints are essential for all types of movements involving the bony parts of the body. Locomotary movements are no exception to this. Joints are points of contact between bones, or between bones and cartilages. Force generated by the muscles is used to carry out movement through joints, where the joint acts as a fulcrum. The movability at these joints varies depending on different factors. 
    1.  Mention two differences between fibrous joints and cartilaginous joints.
    2.  Write one characteristic of synovial joints. 
    3.  What is gout? 

# Section-E
31. What are the two main types of cells in the Islet of Langerhans and what are their important secretions? Describe the mechanism of steroid hormone action with a proper diagram. ***OR*** Explain the mechanism of steroid hormone action with a proper diagram. 
32. With the help of sliding filament theory explain the process of muscle contraction. ***OR*** Explain briefly the following: 
    1.  Angina pectoris 
    2.  Uremia 
    3.  Emphysema 
    4.  Apical dominance 
    5.  Differentiation 
33. Give a schematic representation of glycolysis. ***OR*** Describe the Calvin cycle with a diagram. 