Pranayama is an age-old yogic breathing technique. In Sanskrit, prana means life energy and yama means control. So, in short, the controlled breathing technique is called Pranayama. There are 8 types of Pranayama which can be classified based on different inhalation and acceleration techniques. The main aim of Pranayama is to connect your body and mind through awareness and mindfulness. Supplying oxygen and removing the toxins in return provides healing and physiological benefits. Pranayama has many benefits like improving your lung function, increasing your oxygen level, reducing high blood pressure and decreasing stress. To learn about Pranayama, we need to learn the different techniques that help benefit different parts of the body. 

# Types of Pranayama 

1. **Bhramari Pranayama**: also called humming bee breath, this form of Pranayama is particularly helpful for those who suffer from hypertension. 
2. **Kapalbhati Pranayama**: this form of Pranayama helps detoxify the body and clean energy channels. 
3. **Bhastrika Pranayama**: also called ballow breath, this form of Pranayama helps pump in more oxygen into the body. 
4. **Nadi Shodan Pranayama**: this alternate nostril breathing technique helps calm the mind and helps harmonize both hemispheres of the brain. 
5. **Shitali Pranayama**: this form of Pranayama helps reduce anxiety and helps cool the body. 
6. **Ujjayi Pranayama**: this breathing technique is often used to support vinyasa yoga. 
7. **Anulom Vilom Pranayama: this breathing technique helps relax the body and clear nostril passage. 
8. **Sheetkari Pranayama**: This helps to cool the body. 

# Benefits of Pranayama 

1. **Helps reduce stress**: the increased oxygen uptake that constitutes each form of Pranayama helps reduce stress. Oxygen provides your vital organs with energy including the brain and nerves. 
2. **Improves your quality of sleep**: Bhramari Pranayama has been shown to reduce the pace of breathing and heart rate when it is practiced continuously for 5 minutes. It can help your body calm down for better sleep. 
3. **Improve the way our lungs function**: since Pranayama requires us to take slow, forceful breaths, it can strengthen our lungs. People suffering from asthma and allergic bronchitis will find that Pranayama helps provide relief. 
4. **Increases mindfulness**: Pranayama encourages you to be aware of your breath and how it feels against your upper lip. It teaches us to focus on the present instead of minding about past or future This in turn allows you to be fore mindful. As Pranayama increases the amount of oxygen concentration. It can fuel your brain cells so that you can focus with greater ease. 

# Pranayama Mudras for Pranayama 

The first two fingers of the right hand palm and to be curved and cast two fingers are to be kept straight and to be held together. Now straighten the thumb and bending the right hand in the elbow, place the curved fingers in such a way that they come near the lips. Keep the hand from the shoulder and the elbow glued to the chest. Keep the right-hand thumb on the right side of the nose and the last two fingers on the left side of the nose. Now by pressing the thumb, the nasal cavity on the right side can be closed and by pressing the last two fingers, the left side cavity can be closed. The pressure should be light and on just below the nasal bone, where the fleshy part begins. With this arrangement of the fingers, one can close any of the two nasal cavities. Here only the movement of the thumb and the last two fingers are expected. Movement of other parts should be avoided. The face should be kept quite relaxed to practice breathing more effectively. Further, to practice the cycle of inhaling and exhaling, six supplementary types are given. In all these types, the speed of breathing is more. These are the types of quick breathing. While practicing these types one should first sit in one of the following asanas: Padmasana, Vajrasana or Swastikasana. Then, the left hand should be kept in Dhyana Mudra and the right hand in Pranava Mudra. The eyes should be closed and the whole attention should be concentrated on breathing so that it will be possible to acquire it. 

One of the main benefits of the Pranayama practice is that it helps athletes manage stress and anxiety. The practice of conscious breathing and activating the parasympathetic nervous system greatly helps to reduce the stress hormone in the body. Additionally, a 2019 study published in the Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine found that Pranayama can significantly reduce symptoms of anxiety and depression, improving overall mental health. It helps oneself to temporarily remove from the craziness of the outside world. Pranayama yoga is understood to provide practitioners with various benefits. 